BlazingMQ Client/Broker Protocol (#95)
bloomberg/blazingmq: docs/docs/architecture/client_broker_protocol.md

---
layout: default
title: Client/Broker Protocol
parent: Architecture
nav_order: 8
---

# BlazingMQ Client/Broker Protocol
{: .no_toc }

* toc

> {:toc}

Reviewer: Are these tags working? I don't see expansion in preview https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/0d42983b42e6487741c774b7894be20c1186e905/docs/docs/architecture/client_broker_protocol.md#blazingmq-clientbroker-protocol

Author: They will work in Jekyll.

client library.  Readers interested in implementing a BlazingMQ client library
may find this article useful.

Before we dive in, it is worth noting that:

1. BlazingMQ has native client libraries in C++ and Java.  The Python library
   is a wrapper over C++ library.  BlazingMQ does not have a C library.

2. In order to provide a good user experience, shield applications from various
   transient issues and support high performance, BlazingMQ C++ and Java
   libraries are quite stateful, highly asynchronous and carefully designed.
   If the goal of author of BlazingMQ client library is to reach as many
   audience as possible, they should attempt to do same with their library
   design and implementation.

3. Ideally, the author should be willing to help us maintain the client library
   in the long run.  As a provider of an infrastructure framework, we want to
   provide good support to our users, and having the author's help in handling
   any bug fixes and enhancements in the library will make our job easy!

4. We have had queries about client libraries in Go, .NET and Rust, so
   targeting one of those languages may provide maximum benefits to our users.

> The rest of this document is divided three main parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of this document is divided into three main parts:
```

- *BlazingMQ wire protocol*, which goes over format of messages exchanged
  between BlazingMQ client and broker.

- *BlazingMQ client/server interaction*, which goes over the order in which
  these messages are exchanged.

- *Client library design guide*, which goes over some recommendations for
  implementing a BlazingMQ client library in a language-agnostic way.

Let's dive into some details now!

---

## BlazingMQ Wire Protocol

BlazingMQ wire protocol sits at the lowest level in the BlazingMQ client/server
interaction.  BlazingMQ has a custom protocol over TCP.  This protocol defines
the format of messages exchanged between BlazingMQ client and broker.  There
were four guiding principles when this protocol was designed:

- *Compactness*: The protocol should have minimal overhead.

- *Forward and backward compatibility*: The protocol should be easily
  extensible while remaining backward compatible.

- *Batching*: The protocol should support batching of messages wherever
  possible.

> - *Efficiency*: The protcol should avoid encoding/decoding overhead for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Efficiency*: The protocol should avoid encoding/decoding overhead for
```

  infrequent, it is okay to pay the overhead of encoding/decoding them in lieu
  of flexibility and ease of use.

Let's look into both of these message types in detail.

### Binary Messages

Binary messages in BlazingMQ are defined
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/main/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_protocol.h)
for C++, and
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/tree/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/proto)
for Java.

> [!NOTE]
> The C++ header file `bmqp_protocol.h` linked above also contains some
> binary messages which are exchanged only between BlazingMQ brokers.  This can
> cause confusion when trying to look at the list of messages which are
> exchanged only between client and broker.  A better place to look at the
> messages exchanged between client and broker would be in the Java link above.

Here's a list of binary messages which are exchanged between BlazingMQ client
and broker, along with their purpose:

- **PutMessage**: A message posted by the producer to the BlazingMQ queue. This
  message contains the payload and any associated metadata that producer wants

>   to be deliverd to the consumer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to be delivered to the consumer.
```

  request.

- **OpenQueueResponse**: The response sent by the broker for an `OpenQueue`
  request (see [this](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/msg/OpenQueueResponse.java)).

- **ConfigureQueueStream**: The request sent by the client to the broker to
  configure client's configuration for queue which was opened earlier by the
  client by calling `OpenQueue` request (see
  [this](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/msg/ConfigureQueueStream.java)).
  The main field in this request is
  [`QueueStreamParameters`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/msg/ConfigureQueueStream.java).
  A producer or consumer application can start using a queue only after sending
  an `OpenQueue` request and then a `ConfigureQueueStream` request.  A
  `ConfigureQueueStream` request is used by the producer/consumer to set its
  priority or flow-control parameters for the queue.  A producer/consumer can
  also send a stand-alone `ConfigureQueueStream` request at any time to do the

>   same.  However, it must send one upon receiving a sucessful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  same.  However, it must send one upon receiving a successful
```

and
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/main/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_putmessageiterator.h).
PUT event builder and iterator in Java can be found
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/proto/PutEventBuilder.java)
and
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/proto/PutMessageIterator.java).

### ACK Event

An ACK event is a BlazingMQ network packet which is sent by the broker to the
producer application, with one or more ACK messages indicating success/failure
result for one or more PUT messages previously sent by the producer.

An ACK event wire layout looks like this:

```
[EventHeader][AckHeader][AckMessage #1][AckMessage #2]...[AckMessage #N]
```

An ACK event contains one
[`AckHeader`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/e3ddd4fdc8e024e3abff96aa91555f042ce4e565/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_protocol.h#L1725C19-L1725C19),
followed by one or more
[`AckMessage`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/e3ddd4fdc8e024e3abff96aa91555f042ce4e565/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_protocol.h#L1849)s.

> Note that unlinke a PUT event, there is only one `AckHeader` in an ACK event,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that unlike a PUT event, there is only one `AckHeader` in an ACK event,
```

irrespective of the number of `AckMessage`s.

Let's go over various fields in a `AckHeader`:

- `HeaderWords`: Size (in words) of the `AckHeader`.

- `PerMessageWords`: Size (in words) of each `AckMessage`.

Now let's go over various fields in a `AckMessage`:

- `Status`: result of the PUT message (was it accepted or rejected by
  BlazingMQ, with specific error code in case of failure).

- `CorrelationId`: **TODO**

> - `MessageGUID`: the 16 byte globally unique identfier of a message.  See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MessageGUID`: the 16 byte globally unique identifier of a message.  See
```

PUSH event builder and iterator in Java can be found
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/proto/PushEventBuilder.java)
and
[here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/proto/PushMessageIterator.java).

### CONFIRM Event

A CONFIRM event is a BlazingMQ network packet which is sent by the consumer
application to the BlazingMQ backend, with one or more CONFIRM messages
indicating that the consumer has processed the corresponding one or more PUSH
messages previously sent by the BlazingMQ broker.

A CONFIRM event wire layout looks like this:

```
[EventHeader][ConfirmHeader][ConfirmMessage #1][ConfirmMessage #2]...[ConfirmMessage #N]
```

A CONFIRM event contains one
[`ConfirmHeader`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/e3ddd4fdc8e024e3abff96aa91555f042ce4e565/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_protocol.h#L2296)
followed by one or more
[`ConfirmMessage`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/e3ddd4fdc8e024e3abff96aa91555f042ce4e565/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_protocol.h#L2387)s.

> Note that unlinke PUT and PUSH events, there is only one `ConfirmHeader` in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that unlike PUT and PUSH events, there is only one `ConfirmHeader` in a
```

CONFIRM event, irrespective of the number of `ConfirmMessage`s.

Let's go over various fields in a `ConfirmHeader`:

- `HeaderWords`: Size (in words) of the `ConfirmHeader`.

- `PerMessageWords`: Size (in words) of each `ConfirmMessage`.

Now let's go over various fields in a `ConfirmMessage`:

- `QueueId`: the integer which uniquely identifies the queue.  This integer
  needs to be unique only between a BlazingMQ client application and the
  BlazingMQ backend.  It does not need to be globally unique.  The integer
  value is chosen by the SDK and sent in the `OpenQueue` request.

> - `MessageGUID`: the 16 byte globally unique identfier of a message.  See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MessageGUID`: the 16 byte globally unique identifier of a message.  See
```

  wants to open the queue.  Valid values can be found
  [here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqt/bmqt_queueflags.h#L46).  Note that the `e_ADMIN` is reserved and
  should not be used.

- `readCount`: An integer whose value should be one if the client wants to
  attach to the queue as a consumer, and zero otherwise.

- `writeCount`: An integer whose value should be one if the client wants to
  attach to the queue as a producer, and zero otherwise.

- `adminCount`: An integer whose value should always be zero.

[Here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/test/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/it/PlainProducerIT.java#L162-L203), we
see the `PlainProducerIT.java` creating and sending an `OpenQueue` request.

Upon success, the BlazingMQ broker responds to the `OpenQueue` request by
sending an
[`OpenQueueResponse`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L191-L211).  Let's go over the three
fields in this type:

> - `originalRequest`: A field whose type is `OpenQueue` request, and it simply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `originalRequest`: A field whose type is `OpenQueue`, and it simply
```

  carries the `OpenQueue` request sent by the client.

> - `routingConfiguration`: An integer which indicates information about message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `routingConfiguration`: An integer which indicates information about the message
```

  routing strategy of the queue, as indicated by the broker.  Possible values
  for the flag can be found
  [here](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_routingconfigurationutils.h#L51-L61).

- `deduplicationTimeMs`: An integer which indicates the time interval (in ms)
  for which the SDK should keep the unacknowledged PUT messages in the
  retransmission buffer before generating a local negative acknowledgement.

>   This field can be ignored in the initial implementation of the SDK.

Reviewer 2: An example of what the C++/Java SDKs do (as in, beyond an initial implementation of the SDK), could be valuable, as in [this](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/cce74cbe4f781995b3a9cb9d3f206f6b7f0a4452/src/groups/bmq/bmqimp/bmqimp_brokersession.cpp#L1196).

> [!NOTE]
> For every request/response type like `OpenQueue`/`OpenQueueResponse`, the top
> level schema message is always
> [`ControlMessage`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L84).
> Readers will notice that the first field in this type is `rId`, which
> represents the request ID.  Any time the SDK sends any schema message request
> to the broker, the SDK populates `rId` field with a unique value.  The broker
> always echoes back this value in the response, which enables the SDK to
> correlate the response back to the original request, particularly in the
> presence of multiple concurrent pending requests.  In the absence of this
> integer, the SDK will not be able to identify the request to which the
> response belongs.  This integer can be assigned any value by the SDK, as long
> as it is unique among all the pending requests in the SDK at that time.

As mentioned before, opening a queue is a two-step process.  The first one
`OpenQueue`/`OpenQueueResponse`.  Let's look at the second step.  Note that a

> BlazingMQ client cannot start producing/consumer to/from a queue until the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BlazingMQ client cannot start producing to/consuming from a queue until the
```

request provides a way to the BlazingMQ client to configure its "connection"
with the queue.  Note that the connection is being used logically here, and
should not be confused with a TCP connection.  This request is mostly a no-op
for producers in the BlazingMQ backend (but the producers still need to send
it).

This request is very important for consumers in many ways:

- It enables a consumer to specify one or more subscriptions.

- It enables a consumer to dynamically alter its subscriptions at any time.

- It enables a consumer to configure various attributes of a
  [subscription](../../features/subscriptions), like priority, [flow
  control](../../features/consumer_flow_control), etc.

Now that we have a high level understanding of this request, let's dig deeper.

The `ConfigureStream` request contains two fields.  The first one is `qId`,
which was explained above.  The second one is
[`streamParameters`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L287C22-L287C38).

> Let's look at various fields of this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at the fields of this
```

- `appId`: This string contains the name of *appId*, if any, for the consumer.
  *AppId*s are specified by consumers who are attaching to a *fan-out* queue.
  Consumers of non-fan-out queues, as well as any producers don't need to
  specify any appId.

- `subscriptions`: This field is an array of zero or more
  [`Subscription`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L455-L471)s.
  Each `Subscription` type contains these fields:

  - `sId`: This integer represents a unique identifier for this subscription.
    This integer needs to be unique only between this client and the broker.  A
    simple incrementing
    [variable](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqt/bmqt_subscription.cpp#L44-L49)
    can be used for generating unique `sId`s.

  - `expression`: This field, which is of type
    [`Expression`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L412C4-L426)
    contains the actual subscription expression as a string type as well as

>     expression grammar version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the version of the expression grammar.
```
Was confused at first by this phrasing: didn't know what it meant for the type to contain both a string version of the subscription expression and an expression grammar version of the subscription expression.  This edit makes it clear that it's a version identifier as per the schema.

> [C++](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/9b692fe25f74543e954a27e30b6b15b0ae057c8d/src/groups/bmq/bmqa/bmqa_session.h#L819-L840)
> and
> [Java](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/Queue.java#L24-L34)
> SDKs.

### Posting Messages (Producers)

Let's assume that a producer application opened a BlazingMQ queue by following
the steps mentioned in the [above](#opening-a-queue) section.  The next step
for the producer application would be to post some messages (PUT messages) on
the queue.

#### Post API

Both C++ and Java SDKs support batching of messages i.e., producer application
can send a batch of messages in one shot instead of sending them one by one.
Batching can have a significant impact on the performance.  Additionally, in
both SDKs, the `post()` API is asynchronous i.e., the API does not wait for the
BlazingMQ broker to respond with ACK messages. In fact, in some cases, the API
does not write the PUT messages to the TCP socket.  Instead, the SDK just
accepts the messages, adds them to an internal buffer, and sends them later.

> This can occur if TCP layer is enforcing some flow control, or in case SDK is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can occur if the TCP layer is enforcing some flow control, or in case the client is
```

not connected to the broker, etc.

> Keeping above complications aside, the simplest way to send PUT messages is to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keeping the above complications aside, the simplest way to send PUT messages is to
```

> do what [Java

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
do what the [Java
```

SDK](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/Queue.java#L109-L115)

> is doing.  A public class called `PutMessage` could be created, with data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does.  A public class called `PutMessage` could be created, with data
```

Reviewer 2: Also, the shift in perspective from describing what the C++/Java SDKs do factually to describing what a new client SDK could do with C-ish syntax was jarring, especially in the middle of the "BlazingMQ Client Server Interaction" section.

  SDK.  In this case, the API might look similar to the
  [one](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/c8acf1b840fcd9e907d4404f43e5e687edd660f5/src/groups/bmq/bmqa/bmqa_session.h#L819-L840)
  in C++.

- Alternatively, another approach could be similar to the
  [one](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/Queue.java#L109-L115)
  taken by the Java SDK, where `Queue` is represented as a first class object.

Yet another approach could be making a BlazingMQ `Domain` as a first class
object, such that:

- One creates a `Session`, `Connection` or `Context` object first
- Then, one opens a `Domain` object from the top-level object
- Then, one can open a `Queue` from the `Domain` object.

#### `post` API Implementation

The implementation of the `post` API should simply create a PUT event from the
PUT message(s) specified by the application, by following guidelines
[here](#put-event).  Some other things to keep in mind:

- Ensure that the queue has already been opened by the application.  Since the
  application is calling `post`, it must have opened the queue with *WRITE*
  intent.

> - Ensure that the queue is in the processing of being closed or already closed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ensure that the queue is in the process of being closed or is already closed.
```

- Ensure that the connection with BlazingMQ broker is up, and not stopping or
  disconnected.

> - Ensure that message payload is not emptpy.  By policy, we don't allow other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensure that message payload is not empty.  By policy, we don't allow other
```

  BlazingMQ SDKs to post empty message payloads.

One of the fields in `PutHeader` is `MessageGUID`, which was described in
previous sections.  MessageGUIDs are generated in the SDK every time `post`
API is invoked.

### Processing Acknowledgement Messages (Producers)

> After posting one or more messages, the SDK should expect response from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After posting one or more messages, the SDK should expect a response from the
```

BlazingMQ broker in the form of an ACK (acknowledgement) message containing the
result of the `post` operation.  Multiple ACK messages can be delivered by the

> broker in one ACK event, so the SDK must be able to handle them.  Wire layout

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
broker in one ACK event, so the SDK must be able to handle them.  The wire layout
```

of an ACK event was discussed in a [previous](#ack-event) section.

> One of the fields in ACK message is `MessageGUID`, which can be used to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the fields in ACK message is `MessageGUID`, which is used to
```
Indeed this is the only way to correlate ACKs with PUTs, right?

`MessageGUID` along with any relevant information for that PUT message (e.g.,
the `AckCallback` specified by the application for that PUT message).  When the
ACK message arrives, SDK can extract `MessageGUID` from it, retrieve the
`AckCallback` and then invoke it to deliver the result to the application.

### Receiving Messages (Consumers)

An application which opens a queue as a consumer (i.e., with *READ* intent)
will receive PUSH messages from the broker anytime a new message is posted on
the queue.  Like ACK messages, PUSH messages can be delivered in a batch in a
PUSH event, and the SDK must be ready to handle it.

#### Consume API

As far as handing over PUSH messages to the application is concerned, it can be
done by asking for a callback from the application when it opens the queue, and
dispatching PUSH messages by invoking that callback.  There are various ways to
ask applications for this callback, but the most obvious one could be in the
`openQueue` API (or a flavor of it).  For example, Java SDK has a
[`PushMessageHandler`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/PushMessageHandler.java)

> interface, which consumer application should specify when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interface, which the consumer application should specify when
```

[creating](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-examples/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/examples/SimpleConsumer.java#L117C42-L117C42)
a queue.

Since multiple PUSH messages can appear in a PUSH event, the SDK implementation
must be able to handle that, and it may need to dispatch PUSH messages one by
one in the callback if the callback's signature does not support handing over
multiple PUSH messages to the application in one go.

#### Consume API Implementation

> Wire layout of a PUSH event was described in a [previous](#push-event) section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The wire layout of a PUSH event was described in a [previous](#push-event) section.
```

> As far as implemention is concerned, SDK logic should keep some of these things

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As far as implementation is concerned, SDK logic should keep some of these things
```

in mind when receiving and dispatching a PUSH event:

- Ensure that the queue is still open, and not closed or being closed by the
  application.

- Ensure that the PUSH event parsing passes basic sanity checks e.g., length of
  the packet is equal to the length specified in the `EventHeader`, etc

- Ensure that the `queueId` field specified in the `PushHeader` is valid and
  known to the SDK

### Confirming Messages (Consumers)

After opening a queue, a consumer application will receive messages which are
being posted on the queue.  Some details about handling PUSH messages were

> described in the previous section.  One the consumer application processes a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
described in the previous section.  Once the consumer application processes a
```

PUSH message by executing its business logic, it needs to indicate to the

> BlazingMQ backend that message has been processed successfully and can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BlazingMQ backend that the message has been processed successfully and can be
```

removed from the queue.  This is done by the consumer application sending a
CONFIRM message.

#### ConfirmMessage API

Similar to the **Post API**, C++ and Java SDKs support batching of CONFIRM
messages i.e., consumer application can send a batch of CONFIRM messages in one

> shot instead of sending them one by one.  Batching can have an improved impact
> on the performance.  Additionally, in both SDKs, the `confirmMessage()` API is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
shot instead of sending them one by one.  Batching can improve performance.
Additionally, in both SDKs, the `confirmMessage()` API is
```
or
```suggestion
shot instead of sending them one by one.  Batching can have a positive impact
on the performance.  Additionally, in both SDKs, the `confirmMessage()` API is
```

> asynchronous i.e., the API may not write the CONFIRM messages to the TCP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
asynchronous; i.e., the API may not immediately write the CONFIRM messages to the TCP
```
Although it's true that the broker may never write the CONFIRM message to the socket if there's never again a connection to the broker, somehow it feels strange to foreground that option before mentioning the possibility later on in the paragraph.

socket.  Instead, the SDK just accepts the CONFIRM messages, adds them to an

> internal buffer, and sends them later.  This can occur if TCP layer is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
internal buffer, and sends them later.  This can occur if the TCP layer is
```

enforcing some flow control, or in case SDK is not connected to the broker,
etc.

Keeping above complications aside, the simplest way to send CONFIRM messages is

> to do what [Java

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to do what the [Java
```

SDK](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/PushMessage.java#L70C8-L76)

> is doing.  Alternatively, depending upon the API design, the `confirmMessage`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does.  Alternatively, depending upon the API design, the `confirmMessage`
```

API could be part of a top level object like `Connection`, `Session`,

> `Context`, `Domain`, etc like on [C++

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Context`, `Domain`, etc, as in the [C++
```

SDK](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/f4a4f55ae74caf24995ca540a0fbf70a33fbd9c3/src/groups/bmq/bmqa/bmqa_session.h#L1052-L1059).

#### ConfirmMessage API Implementation

The `confirmMessage` API simply needs to create and send CONFIRM message(s) to
the broker.  As explained in the [previous](#confirm-event) section, a CONFIRM
event contains a `ConfirmHeader` followed by one or more `ConfirmMessage`.

### Configuring a Queue (Standalone)

The BlazingMQ client/broker protocol also supports a standalone
*Configure Queue* request.  Recall that we have already encountered this request
in the **ConfigureStream Request** paragraph of a [previous](#opening-a-queue)
section.  Readers should refer back to that discussion for more details on this
request.

### Closing a Queue

> Once a client application no longer wants to produce/consumer to/from a queue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once a client application no longer wants to produce to or consume from a queue
```

that it previously opened, it should close the queue.  Closing a queue will not
delete the queue in BlazingMQ backend.  It will simply detach the application
from the queue.

Just like opening a queue, closing a queue is a two step process (i.e., it
requires two pairs of request/response exchanges with the broker).  Both of
these steps are encapsulated in the C++ and Java SDKs by the `closeQueue` API,
which looks like
[this](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/ed0eb848f5ac2897cfe32cc481575d689a4cb1c2/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/Queue.java#L78-L86)
in Java and like
[this](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/f4a4f55ae74caf24995ca540a0fbf70a33fbd9c3/src/groups/bmq/bmqa/bmqa_session.h#L961C3-L980)

> in C++ SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the C++ SDK.
```

hood when one calls the `closeQueue` API:

#### `ConfigureStream` Request

This request has been described in the previous section.  When sending this
request as part of closing a queue, any flow control and subscription
parameters in the request are emptied out (or set to null/zero) to indicate
that the client application is about to detach from the queue.

#### `CloseQueue` Request

The
[`CloseQueue`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/58044d8e4579665fffa0419df820c8be5cdbc2eb/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L242-L260)
request provides a way to the BlazingMQ client to detach from a queue.
`CloseQueue` contains two fields.  Let's look at them:

- `QueueHandleParameters`: this type has been described in a previous section.

- `isFinal`: this boolean flag indicates if this is the final close-queue
  request for the specified queue from the client.

Upon success, the BlazingMQ broker responds to the `CloseQueue` request by
sending a
[`CloseQueueResponse`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/58044d8e4579665fffa0419df820c8be5cdbc2eb/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L262-L272).

> [!NOTE]
> The `ConfigureStream` request is sent by the SDK in three cases:
>

> > 1) As the second step in the open-queue workflow (i.e., when application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1) As the second step in the open-queue workflow (i.e., when an application
```

> >    calls one of the flavors of `openQueue` APIs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    calls one of the flavors of the `openQueue` APIs).
```

>
> 2) Sent as a standalone request when application calls one of the flavors of
>    `configureQueue` APIs.
>

> > 3) As the firs step in the close-queue workflow (i.e., when application calls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 3) As the first step in the close-queue workflow (i.e., when an application calls
```

> >    one of the flavors of `closeQueue` APIs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    one of the flavors of the `closeQueue` APIs).
```

### Stopping a Session with BlazingMQ Broker

When a client application decides that it no longer wants to interact with
BlazingMQ, it can tear down its connection/session with the BlazingMQ broker.
This typically happens when the application is shutting down, but in theory, an
application can stop the BlazingMQ session at any time.

Stopping the BlazingMQ session is typically done by calling a
[`stop`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/358eda1e6ea7917e63ee6fb50d15ecd5873dbf56/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/Session.java#L512-L524)
method on the top level Session/Connection/Context object.  This method needs

> to carry out two things -- inform the broker about the disconnect intent and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to carry out three things -- it needs to inform the broker about its intent to disconnect and
```

> wait for a response from the broker, and then finally close the TCP socket with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wait for a response from the broker, and then finally it needs to close the TCP socket with
```

the broker.  Let's look into these steps in detail.

#### `Disconnect` Request

The
[`Disconnect`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/58044d8e4579665fffa0419df820c8be5cdbc2eb/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L124-L134)
request is sent by the SDK to the broker to indicate that the client about to
close the TCP connection.  This is an opportunity for the broker to clean up
any state related to this session.  Once the broker has completed the cleanup,
it responds to this request by sending a
[`DisconnectResponse`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq/blob/58044d8e4579665fffa0419df820c8be5cdbc2eb/src/groups/bmq/bmqp/bmqp_ctrlmsg.xsd#L136-L147).
A guarantee provided by the broker is that once the `DisconnectResponse` has
been sent, the broker will not send any other

> message/request/response/notification to the SDK.  Logically, the *Disconnect*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
message/request/response/notification to the client.  Logically, the *Disconnect*
```

request/response pair can be thought of as a way to ensure that the "pipe"
between client and broker is empty.

#### Closing the TCP Connection

Once the SDK receives the `DisconnectResponse`, it can proceed to close the TCP
socket with the broker, and release any resources associated with the

> connection.  Care must be taken to ensure that the resources are cleaned in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
connection.  Care must be taken to ensure that the resources are released in the
```

right order without any dangling references or leaks.

---

## Client Library Design Guide

Apart from implementing the BlazingMQ wire protocol and the sequence of message
exchanges between SDK and broker correctly, a good SDK should also expose easy
to use (and hard to misuse) APIs, and should have an efficient implementation.
In this section, we will go over some details about the SDK APIs and
implementation which authors of a new SDK may find useful.

### APIs

We list some guiding principles for designing BlazingMQ client APIs:

1. APIs should be designed so that they are easy to use and hard to misuse.

2. APIs should provide high enough abstraction so that users can focus on
   implementing their business logic instead of trying to understand intricate
   API interactions.
   [This](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/blob/main/bmq-examples/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/examples/SimpleProducer.java) Java sample producer is a good
   example which demonstrates this.

3. For certain higher level languages like Python, Ruby, etc., APIs can be

>    opiniated and expose a minimal "surface area", which can simplify the APIs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   opinionated and expose a minimal "surface area", which can simplify the APIs
```

   while also catering to the needs of majority of the users.

4. For languages where people often write high performance applications, APIs
   should be asynchronous as much as possible, while also providing synchronous
   flavor in some cases.

5. Overall, in our experience, BlazingMQ Java SDK provides a set of APIs which
   can be a good starting point for anyone.  SDKs in higher level languages
   should aim to further simplify the Java SDK APIs, while lower level

>    languages can implementing something similar to Java APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   languages can implement something similar to Java APIs.
```

### Implementation

We list some implementation details which authors of new BlazingMQ SDKs may
find useful:

1. The network I/O logic could be made asynchronous (i.e., could use
   non-blocking sockets).  This is not very important for higher level

>    languages like Python, etc. but for languages like Rust, etc.  Non-blocking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   languages like Python, etc. but is for languages like Rust, etc.  Non-blocking
```

>    I/O can enable client appliactions to achieve higher throughput, at the cost

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   I/O can enable client applications to achieve higher throughput, at the cost
```

   of higher complexity of SDK implementation.  One could leverage some well
   known open source libraries which make it easier to achieve async I/O.  For

>    example, Java SDK uses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   example, the Java SDK uses
```

   [`netty`](https://github.com/bloomberg/blazingmq-sdk-java/tree/main/bmq-sdk/src/main/java/com/bloomberg/bmq/impl/infr/net) to achieve async I/O fairly easily.

> 2. For SDKs which are highly asynchronous in their implemenation, it can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. For SDKs which are highly asynchronous in their implementation, it can be
```

>    difficult to reason about when multiple events are occuring concurrently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   difficult to reason about when multiple events are occurring concurrently.
```

   For example, events like a user-initiated *CloseQueue* operation, network
   disconnection with the BlazingMQ broker, and timeout of an outstanding
   *OpenQueue* request could occur at the same time, and it might become
   unreasonably difficult to reason about the code.  As one of the potential

>    solutions, authors may find a FSM based approach easy to implement and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   solutions, authors may find a Finite-State Machine-based (FSM) approach easy to implement and
```
